---
category: Biomedicine
topic: Clinical Methods
title: Medical Haematology Differential Blood Cell Counting
---
Quantitative analysis of haematological compositions through methods of differential white blood cell counts and full blood counts allows for the identification of leukocytic and erthrocytic proportions, as well as, morphological cellular defining. A ltogether, with further examination alongside comparative healthy, normal ranges can allow the distinguishment of pathological deviations.

# Methods

Obtaining our human blood tissue sample: Blood Smear 014. Using the Giemsa stain method, where a blood smear is stained using a composition of methylene azure and methylene Blue, resulting in a variety of colours due to the polychromatic stain depicting the unique qualities and ionic charge of the cellular components (Barcia, J. J., 2007). From there, study of the blood smear begins with microscopic observation using low objective power (10x) lens, this allows for morphological assessment of the red blood population, platelets, as well as, identification of the white blood cell population. Once leukocytic cells have been identified, differential cell counting can begin, objectivity is altered to higher power (40x) lens. Their morphological identity can be subject to five sub-classes - six sub-classes if discrimination of lymphocyte size is required - with primary categorisation dependent on presence of specific granules, with further defining morphological parameters inherent to each subclass (Prinyakupt et al, 2015). Through the method of differential cell counting stated, a sample of 50 identified leukocytes are collected, and quantitative analysis of the sample is performed through generated prcentages of leukocyte sub-class proportionates. Furthermore, so that a full blood count could be determined, counting of all the erythrocytes and leukocytes within five random fields of the blood smear were performed, so that an average percentage of their proportions could be calculated and analysed against normal ranges.

With reference to ‘pending table’. From the observed blood smear, the neutrophil count made major proportionate of the leukocytic count, totalling 80%, this proportion is at the peak upper percentile of typical neutrophil range. On the other hand, lymphocytic count, both large and small variants, existed below the normal range at 12% -- 8% below what is expected in healthy ranges. With regards to eosinophilic, basophilic, and monocytic counts, all three were identified within their normal percentile ranges. Nonetheless, the deviation in neutrophilic and lymphocytic count proportions would indicate an underlying reason to why eosinophilic proportionate were present at mid-range of their typical normal range, and basophilic proportionate at peak of their normal range, and monocytic proportionate at the lowest possible of their typical normal range, however, not forgetting to mention, all three occupied the leukocytic population within the normal range of an healthy individual.

Before further analysing the white blood cell count, referring to ‘pending table 2’, the results of our full blood count concerning the average percentage of leukocytes per field was indicative of leukopenia, as the leukocytic percentage averaged at 0.39%, below typical healthy proportionate existing at 1%. However, this observed leukocytic proportionate may have come about due to possible erythrocytosis swamping the leukocytic proportionate, although this is unlikely due to pathological indications from the deviations seen with neutrophilic and lymphocytic proportions.

Furthermore, as our tests were primarily quantitative, further qualitative analysis, especially with the use of automatic analysers, would allow better examination of erythrocytic components, such as: haemoglobin, iron deficiencies linking bone marrow disorders or even morphological deviations due to negative impacts on the already limited enzymatic abilities of erythrocytes, for example: oxidative stress causing bite mark shapes in the erythrocytic disk due to the lack of NADPH generated from an ineffective hexose monophosphate shunt pathway (Brown, K. A., 1996). Nonetheless, our tested erythrocytes appeared normal, displaying no deviations in size, shape and distribution of haemoglobin, there was also no occurrence of inclusions, crystals formation or aspects of agglutination, which gives
reason to leukocytic linked pathology.

Already mentioned was leukopenia, defined as decrease in leukocytic population. This would be highly indicative of an immunodeficiency, especially considering the identified aspects of lymphopenia and monocytopenia from our differential count, both of which are paramount in the adaptive immune system. In conjunction to the developing presence of acute immune responses, such as: neutrophilia and prevalent eosinophilic and basophilic populations. Altogether indicative of infection, further quantitative and qualitative analysis would be required, as the results are not representative of a healthy individual. In fact, studies show, neutrophil expressed PD-L1 suppresses lymphocytic proliferation, and this is due to the stimulating effects of interferon-γ on neutrophils, which is prevalent in the pathogenesis of the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) (de Kleijn et al, 2013; Roff et al, 2014). The over-reactive signs of acute inflammatory response cell development could be a consequence of a weakened adaptative immune system.

# References

Barcia, J. J. (2007) The Giemsa stain: its history and applications. International Journal of Surgical Pathology. 15 (3) pp. 292-6. DOI: 10.1177/1066896907302239

Brown, K. A. (1996) Erythrocyte Metabolism and Enzyme Defects. Laboratory Medicine. 27 (5) pp. 329-33

de Kleijn, S., Langereis, J. D., Leentjens, J., Kox, M., Netea, M. G., Koenderman, L., and Hermans, P. W. (2013). IFN-γ-stimulated neutrophils suppress lymphocyte proliferation through expression of PD-L1. PloS one. 8(8), e72249. DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0072249

Prinyakupt, J., and Pluempitiwiriyawej, C. (2015). Segmentation of white blood cells and comparison of cell morphology by linear and naïve Bayes classifiers. Biomedical engineering online. 14 (63). DOI:10.1186/s12938-015-0037-1

Roff, S. R., Noon-Song, E. N., and Yamamoto, J. K. (2014). The Significance of Interferon-γ in HIV-1 Pathogenesis, Therapy, and Prophylaxis. Frontiers in immunology. 4 (498). DOI:10.3389/fimmu.2013.00498
